hi friend thanks for joining me
i was glad to be here taseem thank you
for the invitation yes my pleasure i've
been uh reading i've read
three out of four of your books in the
last and last month or so and just been
devouring them so it's it's been a real
treat to read them and i've been very
excited to have this conversation so
um
so just to begin honor
yeah
so just to begin i'd love to hear you
share your background and really your
life story anything that you'd like to
share about yourself biographically and
your story
basically i made my living as a
university professor at a modest
university in northeast ohio
i'm a professor of religious studies
my background is i have a degree in
notre dame in theology from notre dame
and new testament criticism in cambridge
and a phd in philosophy of religion from
brown and so i'm very classically
educated raised in the deep south coming
from mississippi
but when i finished my graduate training
and came to
youngstown state university where i
taught for 33 years
i met the work of stanislav groff of
course one of the foremost authorities
in the psychedelic
integrating psychedelics into
psychotherapy and his work was a turning
point in my life so at that point
i
continued to do my work and i've just
made my living week in week out year in
year out in the classroom doing the
things that professors do
but in my personal life in my private
life i began a 20-year journey
working with high doses of lsd in a
therapeutic protocol pioneered by stan
and other early researchers
exploring the deep structure not only of
my own consciousness
but of the consciousness of the universe
itself at least that's my understanding
of my best interpretation of where i
went
so after holding that material and
sitting on it for 20 years i i did this
work for 20 years between 1979 and 1999
and i sat on it and crunched it and
digested it for another 20 years before
releasing
lsd in the my end of the universe the
story of that journey so basically i'm a
university professor who's part of the
underground psychedelic movement in this
country
[Music]
beautiful it's it's been an incredible
journey to learn about and i appreciate
you sharing it um
i you know you allude to a few in a few
points to
kind of who you were
before you started this journey and your
younger self and i i forget exactly how
you put it but but sort of like uh
you know you might not have expected me
to go down this journey and i was sort
of i got the picture of you as sort of
like straight laced and sort of like uh
analytical
what were you like at that time before
you started all this
well i began my life uh seeking to be a
catholic priest i was in the seminary in
high school
from three years of high school and got
a degree in theology from notre dame so
i began very conventional
and at the same time by the time i
finished graduate school
because of all my education that i had
acquired i became an atheistically
inclined agnostic basically the study of
philosophy of religion
and science had basically wiped my
theological slate clean
and i became a pretty hard and fast
agnostic
and that's the way i began this work and
it was the lsd work that opened me up to
a broader understanding of existence now
i've been a meditator all my life since
college
and i've practiced within different
buddhist traditions within the
the passina tradition and zen tradition
and eventually settling into the
vajrayana tradition
but that all came after um the
psychedelic work well i started
meditating beforehand
but the evolution to more specific
buddhist lineages
came after the psychedelic work had
begun
[Music]
and i've raised you know three kids
been married
you know
mortgages
standard kind of affair you know and
you know me look at me i mean i look
like an accountant you know i kind of i
was designed to be an undercover agent
for alex
wow i love that description
what what was it that so captured you
about groff's work when you encountered
it
oh
well i immediately saw that if what he
was saying was correct this had enormous
implications for philosophy which was my
interest not just for healing and
clinical psychology
but here was the method that allowed us
to get deep firsthand access to
dimensions of consciousness and through
those dimensions of consciousness
dimensions of reality
that
i had seen described in many spiritual
literature bodies of literature but here
was a protocol that allow
people to be initiated if only on a
temporary basis because this is a
path what i call the path of temporary
immersion and we have to be really
careful
not to confuse a path of temporary
immersion from what i would call the ba
the path of abiding presence more
contemplative meditational path
but it gave us temporary access to
states of consciousness far beyond
our ordinary egoic awareness and far
beyond space-time awareness to explore
the deep structure of the universe
itself
this has been a philosopher's dream in a
way and particularly in our culture
which was is material students
metaphysical convictions which has come
to believe that there is nothing in the
universe outside what can be explained
by its material substrate that matter is
the only thing that's real matter is the
only thing that exists and here was a
method that was
challenging that assumption gave us
experiences that would be might be very
difficult to explain
in terms of that materialist hypothesis
so that's
that immediately um
picked up my philosopher's ears
i'm not quite sure how to ask this
question but when you
decided to go on this journey and you
know were inspired by graf and wanted to
adapt his protocol for your own use what
did what did that look like practically
for you what what how did you embark on
that
well i i followed a very strict protocol
and it's one of the things i think that
made my work a little unusual
over the years it came
when you work in a therapeutic protocol
you are totally isolated from the world
you don't take psychedelics and go for a
walk in the woods or go to a grateful
dead concert or even stay up talking
with friends you're totally isolated
from the world you're protected by a
sitter who manages all the logistics of
your day handling the music you're
listening to carefully curated music
with headphones and eye shades you
basically
like in a meditation retreat you turn
your attention totally within and
psychedelics are an amplifier they
amplify the condition of your
unconscious
and it causes subtle levels of
of your mind which you might or you have
to really reach to be able to have
access to them it allows those subtle
dimensions of your mind to come forward
and if you meet them in a very
conscientious
focused manner then a cleaning process
begins a healing process a
confrontational and therapeutic
engagement process begins but you're
totally isolated so basically it's a
it's an entire weekend agenda if i'm
working on saturday which i usually do
i'd start in the early morning would
last all day until after supper time
you're spending days beforehand that
there's protocols that you do beforehand
a lot of
preparation of your body a lot of
preparation of of your diet and of your
spiritual practice there's certain
spiritual practices i would do before
a session and spiritual track practices
i would do after a session
eventually
uh
so it's one very intense day followed by
several days before and after
preparation
and you know it's a several day
commitment each session
i did i chose after several medium dose
sessions i chose to work at very high
levels
using psychedelic therapy not low-dose
psycholytic therapy
this is a protocol that i don't
recommend today
it's not that i'm against occasional
high doses of lsd but this consistent
working just
exploding consciousness so
violently or so aggressively it's a
protocol that i really
don't encourage today but i worked at
500 to 600 micrograms for 73 sessions in
20 years
and on average that came out to about
five sessions a year i worked for four
years
i took six year hiatus and then i worked
in a very aggressive
10 years so it worked out to about five
sessions a year
can you explain the difference between
psychedelic and psycholytic protocols
yeah
a psycholytic protocol is a low-dose
protocol
where which stimulates the unconscious
more gently
and allows it sort of peels the
unconscious layer by layer
and so layers of your trauma or anything
you're holding which is problematic or
uncomfortable for you surfaces in
smaller increments layer by layer
if you work with high doses of lsd in
the early years
these were limited to three sessions
the the work it's that stan did at
spring grove hospital in baltimore
was working with terminally ill cancer
patients who were dealing with death
anxiety and what they were trying to do
was to precipitate a something
approximating a near-death experience to
give these people who were dying a bit
of a glimpse of foretaste of where they
were going when they died
so it's a very powerful a much more
evocative state instead of processing
all the individual layers of the
personal psyche it tends to blow through
those and drive consciousness into a
more radical
state of awareness
so what i did was i thought well if you
could do this work safely three times
you could do it safely more than three
times and i was still thinking in the
early years in a personal model i was
thinking of cleaning my own
consciousness but cleaning it in bigger
and bigger exercises
it's kind of like eating my karma in
fewer and larger bytes
and it turns out that model was
completely incorrect
uh as i learned
by the second or third year
um did did you have a sense when you're
starting out that this would be a
long-term endeavor that you'd be doing
these journeys many many times
no i didn't uh when i started it out i
had been meditating and i had
encountered the usual blocks that
everybody hits in the early years of
meditation
and i first thought i would do some this
therapy in order to push through and
clear those blocks in order to
accelerate
my personal awakening
um and it turns out that that was a
false model
to bring to it and
but once the adventure started once i
began to break into these
experiences of the cosmos
then
i was hooked i i did not expect it to be
taking up such a large
proportion of my life and what i found
was if you go very deeply into this work
you're
you don't integrate it around the edges
of your life and continue to live your
life
kind of like an ordinary life
deep spiritual practice as you know all
when you commit to very deep spiritual
practice it becomes your life you wrap
your life around your spiritual practice
and that happened for me too i mean it
just this became
uh a central focus of my life of course
i
my students and my teaching were central
focus my children and family and
marriage were central focus
but my psychedelic work became the core
of my deeper
philosophical
undertaking
and how did those aspects of your life
relate to each other and influence each
other
well
basically uh i i feel that my marriage
and my teaching
uh were very grounding first i i loved
being a parent i loved being a dad and i
loved being married i loved teaching i
just loved being in the classroom
and i found that those commitments just
kept me grounded
when i was off exploring different
dimensions of reality
on the weekend when i would come back
you know there were
dishes to wash and students to teach it
was a very grounding way so they
complemented each other well it just you
know because
i mean any deep explorer i think has
this experience you're going
in and out you're going back and forth
into these periods of deep absorption
like a retreat
and that's really why i mean i never say
that i've tripped i say i do a session
and it's kind of like a zen sachin
a period set aside for intense spiritual
practice
a psychedelic session is really a
psychedelic sheen it's a period set
aside for intense spiritual practice
when you go back and forth over and over
again in and out of these states back
into your ordinary life
it's really it's important to keep them
in balance and
my life was organized in such a way that
it did
keep
those two different sides of my life did
stay in balance with each other and help
each other
and can you speak to the you make a
distinction between
using psychedelics for
therapy and for spirituality and for you
know the kinds of cosmological
explorations that you ended up leaning
towards can you speak to that
distinction
yeah
and that's something i became more
articulate about as the journey
went on and particularly as i came back
and began to write up the entire thing
because i found that many people who
were beginning to read my work
were trying to understand it
within a
frameworks that were too small to
understand the project and so i
differentiate very clearly now
three different projects that you can do
with psychedelics you can do others of
course but just three
one is therapeutic healing this is the
primary work of the psychedelic
renaissance today working on healing the
wounds of the personal unconscious
post-traumatic stress
death anxiety depression alcohol
addiction
this is working at a personal level at
the early stages
uh different than that
is spiritual awakening this is basically
to try to awaken spiritually to the
truth of one's inner being to
experientially
have access to the center of
consciousness which turns out to be
the same unified reality as the entire
field of consciousness that underlies
all existence this is a different
project than simply therapeutic healing
it's it this is spiritual healing
spiritual awakening you know opening up
to the the rich spiritual underlying
fabric of existence
the exploring of the universe
cosmological exploration is a different
project still
cosmological exploration is not simply
becoming aware or becoming tuned to
the spiritual truths of life it's
exploring beyond those realities into
the deep structure of existence going
beyond space beyond time going into deep
time
uh going into deep space uh going into
archetypal reality you do not have to go
into these dimensions to wake up or
become a fully realized human being you
do not have to go into archetypal
reality you do not have to go to the
beginning of the universe before the big
bang and watch creation emerge out of
the great void of primal existence this
is a very kind of different agenda and i
i think it's important to keep apples
and oranges separate from each other now
they reinforce each other they support
each other in my journey which became
primarily one of cosmological
exploration of course there was a great
deal of healing that took place at a
personal level and there were
episodes of rich spiritual awakening
but if i were aimed at just spiritual
awakening or just
psychological healing i would have
organized the sessions quite differently
but spiritual you know cosmological
exploration
is really kind of like um
any kind of demanding extreme sport kind
of like going climbing mount everest or
going to the north pole i don't know why
anybody would want to go to the north
pole but it's a very demanding thing
that some people like to do
exploring the deep structure of the con
of the cosmos is something like that
it's a very demanding rigorous it
requires tremendous safeguards
and it is going
in places that very few people have gone
and it's not the same as spiritual
awakening
yeah on the one hand i find the
distinction persuasive because this
really does
characterize your work and the kinds of
discoveries that you found and then i
think if you were holding that
distinction as like a purely separate
thing that wouldn't be
aligned with my own experiences of these
things but um it sounds like you're
saying no they can all happen but it's
more like what you're aiming for or what
your intentions are yeah and they
overlap
yeah in that case how
did you
structure
your sessions so as to aim in the
direction of cosmological exploration
and how might someone
structure them if they were aimed at the
other goals
well
i didn't
first i didn't understand a lot of this
at the time when i was doing this work
i understood it only after i'd gone a
long way down this road and was looking
back and beginning to understand some of
the choices the how the choices i'd made
it impact the trajectory of the work
but basically
once you decide you're dosed
that's a significant decision in this
process but working with high doses
you completely surrender to the process
it's impossible to try to direct
you can set all the good intentions you
want but
the states of consciousness that arise
with high doses of psychedelics
amplified by very carefully selected
music
and internalization in a in a kiva
practice
this sets in motion
processes that are so powerful you can't
control them at all you can't direct
them
and you the strategy is simply to
surrender
to let to let your consciousness take
you wherever it wants to take you to
show you whatever wants to show you
no matter how inscrutable at the time no
matter how painful no matter how absurd
it may seem at the time just let it take
you
it's only after the fact when you're
putting it all together
that you may begin to understand some of
the dynamics of the unfolding so there's
a you put it together after each
individual session
but then over a string of sessions i
found that there was a sequential
development so
more or less one session
where one session ended the next session
would begin
kind of like keeping a dream journal
you're just going deeper and deeper
and you may not understand what's
happening until
multiple sessions down the road and then
when you look back you understand that
there's a continuity of development that
is taking place across these different
sessions
so it's not a matter of aiming the
intention beyond the dose and setting
it's really a matter of complete
surrender
and then figuring out after the fact
what has happened
what is the word kiva that you used
kiva you know in uh in the native
american southwestern tradition when
they would
do sacred ceremonies with peyote or with
sacraments there's a kiva as a hole in
the ground you know with a ladder coming
down
and you sit deep in this hole in the
ground around the fire ladder is pulled
up you stay in there isolated all night
long doing ceremony until the next
morning when it's over and the ladder is
brought down so it's i use it as a
metaphor of what a good psychedelic
session is like you're totally isolated
from the world you don't get up and move
around you don't talk a lot you don't
engage with the outside world you're
totally isolated that way
you know that whatever you're
confronting is coming from within
yourself or coming through
yourself it's not you're not being
triggered by outside stimuli
thank you for explaining it
um
yeah there's a question on my mind about
uh
your work and it
in particular
you know it's almost as if you're
presenting
cosmological findings and i i find them
very persuasive personally
and uh you know consistent with my own
explorations and
at the same time i there's a kind of
question of um
like
why would someone take these findings
seriously as as some kind of you know
not just like a an adventure that you
had or an inner experience but as
something that really says something
about the nature of reality
yeah yeah good question and of course
the critical question
how do we know this is more than just
why isn't it just some kind of echoes of
my personal
unconscious or echoes off the collective
unconscious and not something that
really goes beyond
those canyon walls
and here we have to get down there a
couple of things first are are the
experiences replicable
do these experiences show up in the
psychedelic sessions of other people if
it were just me
saying these things or describing these
levels of reality uh then that if it's
just a one-off then it may be just as
you say it could be you know just a
personal kind of indulgence
but these the cosmology that emerges in
psychedelic states first of all
it's echoed in the work of other
psychedelists if they you if they're
using a method
and a substance that has sufficient
power to break through the same number
of layers
basically there is a convergence of
experience that emerges at these very
deep levels so that when i'm describing
my experiences
other psychedelic journeyers recognize
them they recognize them as reflecting
their own experiences well what's
important in this context is to put all
of our experiences on the table together
not just one person but everybody's
experiences and by comparing all of our
experiences in the context of the
methodology that each of us use to
realize these experiences then we get a
better understanding of of what is
idiosyncratic and what is common ground
in that context my work i think is
largely
comfortable within the common ground
that groff has outlined as he has
integrated hundreds thousands of
psychedelic sessions from hundreds of
people through time
but also
what emerges in a psychedelic cosmology
is not unique to psychedelics themselves
but it is the same cosmology that
emerges in deep mystical traditions
in deep spiritual traditions the
contemplative traditions
there are nuances of interpretation of
course and there are
as different mystical traditions have
different interpretive
canvases to articulate their experiences
but if you do a phenomenological
analysis if you look at
the lineages of
witnessing that come out of world
mystical cultures and you compare them
to what emerges in psychedelic
cosmologies they fundamentally are the
same cosmology so that in that sense
there's nothing unique in what i'm
saying the only thing that's unique
is this particular method of gaining
access to these dimensions of reality
yeah i think the method is certainly
unique and and there
at least for me some of the findings
that you share feel
novel or things that i hadn't
encountered previously i mean in
particular the
emphasis on
um
reincarnation as a kind of process akin
to evolution and uh development in a
certain way i mean
there are similar things that i'd heard
elsewhere but but connecting it to
evolution in particular feels feels
novel and then um you know other things
as well but then
that felt
new um
so you said earlier that um
you know about two or three years into
this process that you started to have a
new understanding of the work that
you're doing and it was less about your
own personal you know blocks and
unblocking yourself what was that uh
discovery and what what did you learn
as that transitioned
well for the first two and a half years
i was plunged into a level of
consciousness
uh that's at the very bottom of the
personal psyche it's a dimension that
stan calls the perinatal level of
consciousness it's at the interface of
the limits of physical consciousness and
the beginning of spiritual consciousness
so that typically
people relive their own birth
they relive their their fear of death
birth and death are the revolving door
of life you know we get here by being
born we leave time and space by dying
um
in order for consciousness to expand
beyond time-space reality one has to
confront all that conditioning in our
psyche which tells us that we are a
time-spaced self that i am my egoic
physical body mind awareness
and none of us from that perspective are
really sure what happens to us when we
die and many of us believe there's
nothing that happens to us when we die
death is a cessation of all existence
and we have all sorts of fears
surrounding death and anxiety
surrounding death and basically
in the
confrontation with these
perinatal dynamics one engages
all those fears that the universe is
ultimately meaningless
that the universe completely destroys
all of our
uh attempts
to
do something of value do something of
enduring that something in our life we
will endure and one often re-experiences
one birth in the same time but
eventually if you keep at it this
process culminates
in a in a particular kind of existential
crisis often called ego death
and your
your
physical identity
is shattered it's just absolutely
shattered
and then you transition into a deeper
level of spiritual reality
that lies beyond the parameters of your
physical consciousness
now
this is very common in mystical
traditions mystical traditions talk
about the death of self
shunyatta emptiness of self anata no
self
it's very common in spiritual traditions
as well as psychedelic traditions
it's what happened next that really kind
of shifted my perspective i was
expecting after going through ego death
that i would then have unfettered access
into
a spiritual reality
but what happened was
the entire purification process
began again at a different at a deeper
level i began to get drawn into
exercises
of vast uh collective suffering uh
tremendous pain and suffering
physical ordeals it was like being
swallowed by dante's inferno
and this went on session after session
for two years
deeper and deeper into these vast
landscapes of horrific
pain
and brutality and suffering far beyond
anything i mean my life has never
touched anything like that it's never
known anything like that
and it
this was a real puzzle for me because
for a long time i thought maybe this
represented a deeper
ego death
but in time i eventually came to the
conclusion that no this was not about
healing or cleansing my personal psyche
that somehow in my sessions a shift had
taken place and the focus had become the
healing of the entire human species that
somehow i was tapping into
um
festering fields of pain
which were being held within the
collective unconscious of our entire
species that just as we individually
hold on to our memories and experiences
and some of them are problematic the
entire human species holds on to the
experiences of all of its children all
of humanity and some of those
experiences are very very traumatic the
war the experiences of war the
experiences of drought the experiences
of violence against each other these
aggregate within the collective psyche
and they burden the collective psyche
just as our individual trauma burdens
our personal psyche
and that somehow at this point in my
sessions
i had been kind of given the opportunity
and volunteered to cooperate with this
process
where the
by making these
vast tracts of pain conscious
there was some way in which these were
being lifted
out of the collective psyche just as
when you
encounter personal trauma in your
personal psyche and you confront it it's
lifts that trauma out of your personal
system
and it was after going through this for
two years
that eventually there was a crescendo of
this process a huge healing process
which then threw me into a yet still
deeper
level of consciousness and that's when i
began to really understand
that there are
cycles of death and rebirth
in this work and that the cycles
deepen and change as the level of
consciousness that you are working on
deepens so the first level of healing
and cleansing was taking place at the
perinatal or personal level of
consciousness the second level of
healing was taking place at the
collective level of consciousness and
then there were levels of consciousness
that i went to
that were even deeper
but this cycle of death and rebirth
purification and transformation is a
cycle that repeats itself multiple times
if you keep going deeper
into the great expanse
what words would you use to describe the
levels that you went to beyond personal
and collective
uh when i was looking back over the
whole of my journey
i basically divided it into five broad
overlapping categories
working at the level of personal mind
working at the level of the collective
mind then moving into archetypal reality
beyond
beyond even the collective psyche
and then
the level of causal reality or the one
mind where the entire universe moves as
one
and then beyond that entering for the
last five years of my work what i came
to call the diamond luminosity
an exceptionally clear hyper hyper clear
expression of pure light
which when i looked for
religious
correlations or spiritual traditions
correlations in buddhism i think this is
what they call dharmakaya
the clear light of absolute reality out
of which existence springs
so those five levels personal mind
collective mind archetypal mind the one
mind
and diamond luminosity
i'd like to return to that um
maybe
one of the themes in your work is
i think giving a really persuasive case
for reincarnation and
you know i was already i already sort of
believed in reincarnation for my own
explorations but it's a really really
solid case that you make for it i think
and
you wrote a book life cycles about it
and then
later on in your most recent book lsd in
the mind of the universe you're like oh
i there were some things that i i think
i didn't quite get to in that book and i
wonder if you could describe your your
current understanding of reincarnation
well as a philosopher i think
reincarnation is a fundamental and
important concept to examine
because philosophical traditions
diverge if you believe that there is no
reincarnation
and if you believe there is
reincarnation it you end up with two
different understandings of reality
so one of the early things i did in my
academic career was really look
seriously at the question is there
empirical evidence what's the state of
empirical evidence for reincarnation
now 50 years ago this evidence what did
not exist but today it does i think we
have ample empirical evidence that
reincarnation is a simple fact of life
and the primary work here comes from ian
stevenson's work studying young children
around the world who have spontaneous
detailed memories of their previous
lifetime and the opportunity we have
verified these memories and we have
separated out and
really re eliminated the possibility
that they could have acquired these
memories through natural means so for
that and for evidence from past life
therapy that is a strong philosophical
case can be made
for reincarnation being a simple fact of
life it doesn't mean we understand how
it takes place we don't understand the
physics of it
we may even have a very incomplete
understanding of the project of it what
the purpose of it is
and i personally think that the classic
eastern interpretation of reincarnation
i've come to see is incomplete it's a
first approximation but it's not the
complete story
but because of this available evidence
the first book i wrote
wasn't on reincarnation which presented
the evidence and then asked okay so what
what so what if reincarnation is the
fact of life what does this tell us
about the way the universe works
the classic story and the story that i
used in telling that story the classic
story of reincarnation is a story of the
individual soul or individual
consciousness making choices inheriting
the consequences of those choices which
out of which they then make new choices
so there is a learning cycle between
choosing and inheriting choosing
inheriting and this takes place within a
lifetime and it takes place across
multiple lifetimes but it's the story of
the individual soul
into becoming individually more
spiritually mature
more capable more compassionate more
talented so on and so forth
in their it's an individual story
what i found in my psychedelic work when
i began to open up into the collective
psyche and deep within the collective
fields of consciousness is that in
addition to this individual story there
was a collective story that the entire
human
species
and some fundamental ways
operates as a single organism there is
an intelligence that's operating within
the entire species and that all of our
individual incarnations
were profoundly and subtly integrated
into the integration
of this group species of this group and
that there was a way in which the
intelligence of the species was
manifesting itself in certain patterns
of
detoxification purification breakthrough
that were happening collectively so it
wasn't just individual choices driving
it all but there were also collective
choices and a collective intelligence
driving the entire process
i also was given a
came into a series of experiences that
gave me a different understanding of
where reincarnation is taking humanity
because the classic eastern vision
is that reincarnation evolves you to a
certain point until you have a a core
breakthrough the hindus called it moksha
escape
where we escape ego but we also escape
samsara we escape physical existence
so
the basic vision here is you achieve
moksha or you achieve nirvana and then
when you die you achieve parry nirvana
final nirvana but the goal is to achieve
some type of spiritual fruition which
then allows you to graduate from space
time and to rest in some spiritual
paradise off planet whether it's the the
muslim garden
or the christian heaven or the buddha
pure land it's some off-planet paradise
but that of course leaves unanswered
what is the purpose of time and space
which was okay as long as we were
thinking that time and space had only
been around for a few thousand years but
now that we understand that we're
talking billions and billions of years
of evolution of time and space
it doesn't seem to really be a very
satisfying account to say that after all
these
millions of years billions of years and
millions of years of evolution of homo
sapiens it's
all the work that has gone into learning
how to walk upright and and use and
become a tool user and about 5 000 years
ago we became conscious of this deep
common ground of the psyche that as soon
as we begin to become conscious of this
underlying
encompassing
buddha nature our essential nature as
soon as we become aware then we leave
and the goal is just to leave
and
what happened in my sessions was
something quite different at a pivotal
session and i'd done past life therapy
before i mean not in the psychedelic
work but
you know hypnotherapy i was familiar
with a dozen or so had worked with
healing
and integrating a dozen or so of my
former lives but in this session my
former life started coming into me they
were coming in to me and it was like
wrapping
filaments of white light around a kite
spool
more and more consciousness more and
more lives were coming into me they had
been healed they were coming into
and they reached a point where they
fused
all of these individual lives fused into
one life
and when they fused i was there was an
explosion of diamond light from my chest
and i was catapulted into a state of
awareness
that was beyond anything i had known up
to that point in time
i was an individual
but i was an individual beyond any frame
of reference that i had previously known
and this i came to understand as the
birth of the diamond soul i language it
other people give it different words but
it's basically the idea here is that
reincarnation doesn't just grow us
individually layer by layer class by
class you know challenged by challenge
but there comes a time when our entire
history
is aggregated and integrates into a
single consciousness
and at that point that single
consciousness
becomes one's working identity
so basically what's happening is
the soul
is becoming born
inside history and by soul i'd i think
there are ways of understanding the soul
that are completely compatible with the
buddhist teaching
and no self because this is not an egoic
soul it's not a soul of boundaries it's
not a soul of of that's inherently
self-centered in its appetites but
once the soul emerges there's a
tremendous breath
of intellect breath of compassion and a
deep communion
with the spiritual forces of the
universe
and so the goal
of reincarnation
is not simply to evolve us to the point
where we become spiritually awake and
leave
but the goal is to evolve those to the
point where truly we become
a the next iteration
of human evolution we become a species
of incarnate souls
so that we're never tempted to take our
private ego
as our
true identity but we know ourselves to
be
of this time traveler we know ourselves
to be
deeper than that and we know we have
kinship relations with so many thousands
of people and we have kinship
relationship with the earth we know that
the earth that we leave will be the
earth will inherit in our next
incarnation
souls live on earth differently
than eagles do
and i think that's the i think that's
the pivot we're in the process of making
now and i understand four or five
thousand years ago in the axial age when
we first began to make discoveries of
this spiritual reality the spiritual
reality which is so much more satisfying
than time-space reality
it would develop an up and out cosmology
the theology which says the purpose is
to go home we don't believe belong here
this is our fallen condition
we don't want to stay here we want to go
back to where we came from i understand
that
but i think it's an incomplete
understanding of the deeper project of
creation the project of creation is to
awake
and bring heaven
to earth to live the buddha
world
here inside
our physical existence
what what do you feel
you know so in my own life i've been
really moved by buddhism and inspired by
buddhism and certainly other traditions
as well and
i find what you're saying compelling
that uh
you know there there was an incomplete
truth to
the teachings offered in the axial age
where there's there's wisdom to them and
and benefit and yet it's also incomplete
and um i wonder how you would describe
um
the relationship of the perspectives
that you hold now
in to
the teachings that
we may have received from the past
and perhaps buddhism in particular
well
once again
i want to emphasize that the work i did
is a path of temporary immersion
temporary immersion does not
easily
or conventionally lead to permanent
shifts in awareness you have to do a lot
of spiritual practice before any of the
things that we experience in the
temporary
condition the psychedelic amplified
condition can become our ordinary daily
consciousness
and so
the great masters of the spiritual
traditions and the great masters of the
buddhist tradition
have always been my heroes and their
teachings have always been my guiding
light in terms of how to engage these
psychedelic states in a responsible
manner how to invest in them in a way
which leads can be converted into or
leads to long-term
transformations of one's baseline
consciousness
on this earth so
first truly genuinely all honor
to the great beings
of these traditions
and at the same time
uh we know that there is patriarchy for
example uh in the buddhist traditions
and buddhism has had to clear itself of
its patriarchy just as other religious
traditions have
i think there are other limitations
there is a
a kind of
anti-physical
a disparagement of the physical body and
which is a subtle disparagement of
nature which itself is becoming aware of
and it is having to transcend
i think there are elements within
buddhism that have a deep appreciation
of the joy of living the buddha nature
and sees that the buddha nature
is intended to be lived
within time and space
that samsara truly is nirvana when
understood completely nirvana does not
require an abandonment of samsara but
actually is
coherent with samsara
and yet
they're the mainstream sources of
buddhism for the popular people still
have kind of an up and out cosmology
working christianity too you achieve
salvation and then you escape to go to
heaven
so i think
as an historian it's simply a matter of
you know understanding the historical
context within which these great masters
were working
and which
helped them and hindered them in some
ways from the you know the full
expression giving full expression of
their spiritual realization and yet
in
even if you're working spiritually
within an incomplete cosmology
the levels of spiritual realization
which can be achieved is just
extraordinary what great masters can do
the great mahasitas of the lineages can
do
is just extraordinary and deserving of
all respect
so in criticizing the cosmology within
which some of them operate that's not to
criticize the level of spiritual
realization they have achieved you know
nor
i want to emphasize again to have had
unusually deep spiritual experiences in
a psychedelic state
is not to have stabilized those
experiences any meaningful way in one's
ordinary consciousness there is still a
great deal of work to do
before those states of awareness can
become abiding in any
serious sense
so i always want to qualify
the insights that emerge
in psychedelic work
yes yes
and certainly for myself this is a
question that comes from a place of deep
respect i mean that buddhism is is like
like my home in a certain way so uh
but i appreciate the the clarifications
that you add to it and uh
um
i wonder
you know you spoke earlier about your
own spiritual practice and the different
traditions that you've been exposed to
and it seems like you found sort of a
home in in vajrayana buddhism is that is
that right
it is
and it's a kind of a modified
uh adriana because i was doing kind of
intense vajrayana practice for a number
of years
and i've modified it from my own
psychedelic
experiences
because i've come to understand that
i have
it's not that i've realized the
states that i encountered in my deep
psychedelic work but i have
an understanding and experience of those
levels of reality they live inside me as
memories they are active memories
and so i've developed forms of adriana
practice
i've expanded them by actively
integrating those memories into
the realization protocols
so for example you know in in classic
vajrayana practice
we distinguish between the samaya sappha
and the jananasatva the samayasatha is
the being of construct it's the being we
formulate through our mantras through
our visualizations and using of tonkas
and exercises to create some
approximation of pure goodness pure
insight
which then attracts the genocide for the
reality the cosmic reality so we we make
our
visualization pure in order to open a
channel between the cosmetic reality
which then we invite to poorest
blessings into us
well in a way i use my psychedelic
memories as part of constructing my
samaya safa
to me the living memory
of the diamond luminosity is a more
effective spiritual vehicle of practice
than the beautiful tonkas
that
attempt to give some type of physical
expression of this sublime perfection
okay
so i modify it in that way
i also have a sense
because i've died so many times and
because i've gone where i will go when i
die physically
i've gone into that domain so many times
i feel a deep comfortableness with it
and i feel a familiarity
with that domain
and um i think this changes one's
practice because
you know we're told over and over again
we practice in order to prepare for the
moment of death
because the moment of death is the great
potential has great potential for
accelerating our evolution
and i agree with that and i
i tried to live that in my psychedelic
practice has been done in a way to
prepare me for the moment of death
and the net result of it is that i feel
very comfortable
with death and i feel very comfortable
with
being able to navigate what comes after
death
because i feel like i've already
encountered it in many ways
[Music]
what do you think it was about
adriana buddhism that
attracted you and felt like you could
metaphorically
find a find a home there
well it was my first wife carol who was
my sitter in my sessions a clinical
psychologist herself who really brought
me into vadriana i was kind of
aesthetics i was more interested in this
zen tradition
uh i really wasn't interested with all
the bells and candles and incense and
you know all the fanfare that comes with
fadriana
but she went there and i basically
followed her there and through her
met the teachers
that were gathering and came through
tarmandala a buddhist retreat center uh
lamasville tramaliones established the
center in colorado
and began to study with her and
go into retreats with the teachers of
that lineage and so i i met their
lineage of awakened beings and they made
a deep impression on me
if my karma had been such as to
introduce me to the great awakened
beings of the zen lineage
then you know i could have gone there
just as easily but it was just the
opportunity to meet these beings to
receive teachings from them
that made a large impression on me
and uh coming back to
your explorations uh use the phrase deep
time can you say what you mean by that
when i uh
first began to enter the ocean of
suffering when i made the transition
outside of egoic after ego death and i
went into these episodes of collective
anguish
when i came
every session is divided into thought of
two halves there's a purification half
followed by an ecstatic half so you go
through the purification half and if you
submit to it it comes to a crescendo
a breakthrough and then you're spun into
a transpersonal of
section of teachings and ecstatic in
teachings and next and so on so forth
so when i was being when i was thrown
after this very intense collective
purification
i began to enter into states of
consciousness that were
extremely novel and unprecedented for me
and i came i first called it whole time
and i came to call it deep time
i began to have experiences of my entire
life start to finish as a completed toll
it was like every time moment in my life
was in a tree was a tree
and i experienced the whole of my life
as a single
tree
i experienced my old age my middle age i
experienced the themes of my life as
simultaneously present this was such a
dramatic expansion of my cognitive frame
of reference that after the session
i couldn't hold on to it it disappeared
i forgot it i couldn't hold it
but i found that with repetition going
back into that state again and again and
it was i was always taken into the same
reality
for a year
for seven sessions
by returning to it and working very
diligently to stabilize your state of
consciousness there i learned how to
hold on to it i learned to remember it i
learned how to become cognitively
competent
in deep time
and what i've came to believe was that
there
there are really many multiple
modalities of time
operating within the universe
later
after this period when i went
still deeper in my work
going in toward archetypal reality i
experienced larger swaths of time
than just my personal life the first was
my personal life about maybe 100 years
but then i began to experience
whole time or deep time in terms of 100
000 year increments and maybe even
larger later
and
basically
not only was my sense of time expanding
but who the being was who was having
those experiences was expanding
so it's not simply like you take a
disembodied ego and have an experience
of transpersonal reality which you then
bring back
but literally
your ego is shattered and you dissolve
into a deeper level of consciousness
and it is that deeper level of
consciousness that opens up into these
deeper levels of time
and then instill deeper you you
literally become
a different being than simply
a discarnate egoic presence you become a
different being for hours and hours at a
time
so
you're dissolved into the fabric of
existence
and dissolved into the fabric of
existence you sometimes have experiences
of how existence itself experiences time
now
there are some trends in physics today
that are
hypothesizing that just as super string
theory hypothesizes multiple dimensions
of existence beyond time and space
that some of these dimensions of
existence that physics is
conceptualizing
involve different modalities of time
i don't know what the relationship is
exactly between that and what my
experiences is but my experiences that
as you go to the edges of space time
you enter into different modalities of
time and different sets of insights
emerge
in these different modalities of time
now i understand how absurd this sounds
to my academic colleagues and my
scientific colleagues who
generally tend to think that the entire
universe works within linear time there
is an arrow of time
tachyons may move backwards into time
but basically the universe moves forward
in time and it's an absolute limit
uh
i think the very best of the edge of
quantum thinking goes beyond that
and certainly my psychological my
psycho-spiritual experiences
go beyond that time became very poorest
in my work estimate all my boundaries in
the work
i imagine it's difficult to put into
words but is there anything more that
you can say about what the experience of
that is like like either with your own
personal life seeing the whole of it at
once or
the larger scales
well
first once you acclimate to it
it's not confusing at all it's clear
very very clear it's it's
simply a different way
of relating to time
uh
insights emerge
out of the fabric out of an extended
fabric of time for example at the
personal level
when i experienced my my life as a
completed whole naturally
i understood the deep structure of my
life better than i had before i
understood some of the themes of my life
i understood how things that i had been
concerned with and the recurring issues
of my
philosophical inquiry and my personal
life that those issues were deeply
etched in life and would be consuming me
for the entirety of my life i could i
could see and feel my future
you don't i didn't see all the details
it's not like seeing all the details of
your life but it is as though all your
time moments congeal to give you a deep
reading
of what the substance of your life is
about
likewise when you dissolve into the
human species
and you dissolve into a large swath of
time on the order of hundreds of
thousands of years
you have
there are insights that arise in that
context
about the developmental stages of human
evolution
so i
began to have experiences
of not just of my personal future but of
humanity's future and i know again i
know this sounds arrogant and like ego
running amok but it's the most natural
thing in the world that when you
dissolve into
the condition
of the full species mind and you
dissolve into deep time simultaneously
it's just natural that some of the
developmental future
what is from our present the future of
this species comes into view
but when you experience that you don't
experience it as something yet to be
you experience it as something that
already has been
and both of those are held
simultaneously it is yet to be
and it's also something that has been so
it has a certainty about it
and i don't know how to to work out or
reconcile all of these things with free
will and any number of different
questions but there's just a there's a
breadth of understanding that opens
so that
not only did i begin to understand
better what my personal life was about
but i began to understand the time and
history that humanity has entered
that it's coming into a developmental
crisis it's coming into an evolutionary
pivot point
and and some of the characteristics of
that crisis and the characteristics of a
breakthrough
which i think is coming
these all emerge are these all become
possible
uh by shedding
the
limitations of linear time as we
conventionally know it and going into
deeper dimension of time
uh
i was definitely thinking about free
will just now and i it makes sense that
it would be difficult to
address that on a large scale
philosophically i mean it's a
long long debate
but i wonder what
sensibilities these experiences gave you
about your own life and free will and
choices and you know sort of having a
sense of your whole life did
did you
[Music]
feel sort of like you're fated to make
certain choices or
that you had
uh free will in it or how did that
impact you personally yeah
free will is a tricky topic isn't it
and much of our popular discussion
of it i find just
not very satisfying to skims the surface
um advocates of free will
over tend to understate the level of
conditioning that qualifies our freedom
and
people who
believe that
the determinism
of our conditioning is so profound that
we may feel like we're free but if you
examine it really carefully you find out
that your conditions are so highly
conditioned your choices are so highly
conditioned that there really isn't free
will there i find a lot of that
discussion just
not very satisfying on either front
to me
one of the themes that has come through
repeatedly in my work
is that
we do
we do have free will
it's a conditioned free will
but we have within those conditions the
opportunity to make choices
if we didn't have the opportunity to
make choices we wouldn't be truly
learning there really wouldn't be an
adventure of learning
if when we incarnate we were simply just
inheriting a predetermined fate
then we're just basically going through
the process of mechanical actualization
and it wouldn't be a genuine learning
exercise if you can't make mistakes
if you can't truly come to crosswords
roads and say well i'm going to go
either a or or b which one should i do
and that's a true choice a genuine
choice which has learning ramifications
then we wouldn't be
it wouldn't be an adventure in learning
and i don't think
i think the universe wants us to learn
it at least the messages that i get is
that
freedom is an absolutely important
quality
now it's always relative
at early stages there's very little
freedom
when grass grows it doesn't have a lot
of freedom in terms of how to respond to
photosynthesis and so on and so forth
but the more our consciousness develops
the more choice enters into the picture
the more individuated consciousness
becomes the more the cycle of learning
becomes more important
and still our choice is conditioned
but the conditioning gets lighter and
lighter the sense of freedom being able
to make clear choices
emerges
but to make
free choices to make clear choices
require certain
uh
self-conscious practice
of stepping out of the conditioning
of our mind and of course the meditation
traditions are well aware of this
because when we quiet the mind what we
become very aware of
is
all the multiple voices that are going
on inside us and all the layers of
conditioning that are conditioning our
moment-to-moment awareness and we have
to patiently strip those away we have to
let them exhaust themselves and as we do
that clarity
of unconditioned consciousness begins to
dawn within our awareness right and that
becomes
uh that is such a novel experience and
so distinct from conditioned
consciousness that it becomes the very
highly desirable
state to cultivate to enter our true
nature our unconditioned nature
i think these insights replicate
themselves in psychedelic work as well
that
what one encounters
that in psychedelic work
is conditioning
you're throwing off layer and layer and
layer and layer of conditioning
purifying purifying it's like all one
long nindro
all one long practice of purification
to uncover
what is already there
but something which has been covered
over by that conditioning
now in cosmological exploration you are
going beyond what is simply uncovering
what is already there but that still
remains part of the one of the core
dynamics is letting go of the
conditioning to have a deeper experience
of the clarity that's present in the
immediate
conditions of one's awakened mind
okay
can you say more about the
sort of uh
visions that you had for humanity's
future and the time that we're in
this was one of the great surprises for
me in there because i never expected
anything like this to emerge in my work
i thought
this was about personal transformation
or even personal enlightenment or
something like that
i never
imagined
that
the evolution of the species would
become such a dominant theme
in my work
what happened was going all the way back
to about halfway through the work back
into the early early 90s starting in
i began to have a
series of visions they were just dropped
into my sessions
a series of visions
that humanity was coming to a turning
point this was a true before and after
point in history
this was
we were entering a time of intense
purification that we were basically
purifying the human psyche
of the sins of our fathers so to speak
purifying ourselves lifting the
conditioning
of the past in order to make us more
receptive to and capable of
internalizing
spiritual infusion spiritual insights
and power that was coming into us
becoming made available to us at this
time in history
so there was a tremendous sense of
rebirth
coming
and
all of this was contextualized within an
initial experience
of experiencing creation in terms of
love that that the act of creation the
big bang
is not simply a generative acts of power
or an act of
intelligence
but it actually is an act of love that
creation
is itself an act of love of cosmic love
and therefore that all the suffering
which is which takes place has taken
place since the big bang
all the suffering in in the human story
in particular
all that suffering takes place in the
context of love this is not something
which is being done to us
it's not something which we are guilty
we are in any way guilty about
this is all part of a creative process
that we entered into voluntarily we
entered into by choice
and it is hard it's very difficult but
it is a noble gift that we are giving to
the creative process to participate in
the evolution of this species at such an
early and barbaric time in its life that
we do these terrible things to each
other but all of this was coming to a
crescendo a moment in history where we
would pivot into a higher order a higher
order of spiritual awareness a higher
order
of psycho-spiritual realization
so this went on for years and eventually
i cataloged these in the book in a
section that i call the visions of
awakening six core visions
and that the creative intelligence was
trying not just to awaken individuals
but it was trying to awaken the entire
species
but it gave me no insight into how it
was going to pull this off i had no idea
how it could possibly
achieve this type of breakthrough
in human evolution
and then in 1995
uh right before christmas in 1995 i had
a session
in which i was taken deep into deep time
i was dissolved into the species so
there was no more crispy i just
dissolved completely into the species
and taken into deep time and experienced
the death and rebirth of humanity in a
transtemporal context so i experienced a
time in history of increasing
destabilization
of tomb of
chaos
and tumultuous unraveling the systems of
life were being unraveled there seemed
to be wave after wave of ecological
crises that eventually triggered a
global systems crisis a period of
breakdown of structures at deeper and
deeper levels an unraveling of life
we were losing control
uh of life we were
it wasn't we couldn't kind of fix our
way out of this this was a profound
shattering of life as we had known it at
the core
and in
the midst of this at the point where it
looked like we were all going to die
it was as if a storm passed over the
island like a hurricane passing over
a pacific island
and the winds began to subside the
metaphorical winds began to subside
and the worst of the christ is past
and we began to pick ourselves up off
our knees
and as we picked ourselves up off our
knees and began to rebuild and reconnect
and put together life on the other side
of this crisis
we were we found that we were different
beings we were not the same as we had
been when we went into this crisis
there is something that happens in this
multi-generational crisis
and i don't have beyond what i've said i
don't have any details of when where how
it wasn't that kind of experience it was
the fact that humanity was coming into a
profound crisis at a global level a
global systems crisis
that something about this transformation
would break through
the deep layers of conditioning of the
human heart would tear away all the
self-centered behaviors not only of
individuals but of our culture would
just break us down
and when we moved through this crisis we
discovered
values
inside our being we discovered
new values new insights new ways of
being in the world new ways of being
with each other
this wasn't simply the birth of a of an
ecologically responsible civilization it
wasn't simply a cultural rebirth but it
literally represented a shift in the
core
structure
of the human psyche this was a shift in
the plate tectonics
of the collective psyche
that
anyway that was the vision of it and and
i think that the if
in my experience this i examine what the
nature of this future human is what is
this future human
that's so much more than the present
human is what is it and i think it is
the emergence of the diamond soul in
history
i think that we have been growing
the diamond soul gestating the diamond
soul for incarnation after incarnation
for tens of thousands of years hundreds
of thousands of years
but the birth of the diamond soul in
history
is a relatively short traumatic
convulsive period gestation is long
birth is short i think we are entering a
time in history where we can no longer
afford the luxury of a planet run by
egos
even well-intentioned egos
we have to grow up we have to grow into
a deeper
our deeper spiritual identity and that
deeper spiritual identity is the diamond
soul or the soul or however you want to
languish this we need to grow up and i
think that we have entered this crisis
this beginning the very very early
stages of an unraveling
of life as we have known it
and we are going into a future and i
think it's really important to have a
vision that's why at the end of the book
i really focus on the visions that i was
given of the future human
because if we don't have an
understanding of what's going on if we
don't have a vision
of what nature is in the process of
producing
then the pain will be so intense we
could succumb to despair
and some
terrible apocalyptic interpretation
that would be very counter
our survival and i think we need to have
a deep understanding
of where nature is taking
us how does this
phrase that use diamond soul relate to
the diamond luminosity that you began to
experience in your own sessions is it
the same thing or something different
i think it's a variation of the same
thing
the diamond luminosity i experienced i
believe to be
a level of reality
in the cosmos i mean in build this
terminology
i would describe it as a extra some
historic reality which means it's beyond
cyclic existence which means it's beyond
the bardo there are many many many
layers of the bordeaux there's the low
animal hell realms there's the high
daily realms
but the diamond luminosity is beyond all
of those and there is a clear
sensation a
phenomenological difference between
experiencing the high deity realms and
then moving into the diamond luminosity
realms which is beyond all deities
beyond archetypes beyond any of this
dimension
now
when the soul
congealed in my being and the diamond
luminosity
the soul exploded from my chest it had
that same
quality of light as the diamond
luminosity
but a slightly
lower intensity of that light
now let me back up
we experience light many times in the
psychedelic journey it's very common
when you go through ego death you enter
light you encounter when you enter
collective dimensions you experience
dimensions of light i had known light
many times the diamond luminosity is not
simply using a fancy metaphor to
describe this light
i learned that there are many degrees of
light there are many dimensions of light
and the diamond luminosity is an
exceptionally pure exceptionally clear
dimension of light
i think
the diamond soul as an ex as a light to
being
is
a manifestation of this quality of light
inside
individuated existence
so it's on the one hand it's the same
and on the other hand
it's a variation
on the same i wouldn't want to say it's
necessarily identical
but it seems to be very very close
i will say that when i entered the
diamond luminosity work over five years
basically i only entered what i call the
diamond luminosity four times
and i entered it about once a year
for four years
so i would do a very intense
purification for session after session i
would tap into the diamond luminosity
then i would be brought back for another
year very very intense purification
before being brought back into the
diamond luminosity again
so it wasn't like accessing it
easily and ever once gained accents i
only touched that reality
four times in its total purity
from the way you're describing i'm
getting a sense of
almost
like uh
you know
the scientific name for humanity
currently is like homo sapiens and
almost like a different kind of humanity
like i don't know the latin term for
diamond but like diamond human or
something like that is is that
consistent with what you're saying
it is people give it different names
some people call it homonoeticus and
knowing humanity homo spiritualis some
people call it homoluminense
a light humanity i think many of us have
this intuition that humanity is going
into a next iteration
you know there was a time about a
hundred thousand years ago
where the size of our brain basically
increased fifty percent i mean in a very
short period of time suddenly we were
dealing with the much larger brain
nature
triggered it decided to give us a bigger
brain that we came in with larger
equipment something like that is
happening now
we are cooperating with an evolutionary
process but we are we are not driving
the process nature is driving this
process nature is bringing us into this
new condition and we have many people
have this intuition many indigenous
cultures have this intuition of this
time of global crisis followed by
breakthrough and there's no absolute
certainty
you know that we will survive birth dear
birth is the dangerous time not all
fetuses survive the birth process
so it's not like this is a foregone
conclusion
but so many beings have had this
intuition and they they bring different
names
for describing this future human
[Music]
there's a term that you borrow from graf
of uh coax systems and then you describe
uh
meta coex systems and um i think
a lot of what you're talking about seems
related to that i wonder if you could
verbally describe what those are and and
explain those a little bit
what stan found is that the the psyche
organizes its experiences it organizes
its memories in terms of clusters
thematically integrated clusters
so that it if
it takes all of our experiences of
abandonment
and all of those experiences that we've
had around abandonment form one tight
experiential cluster which he calls a
coex system or a system of condensed
experience carl jung called it a complex
we could have experiences around anger
experiences around fear
experiences around
unrequited love
that they
basically it's kind of like reading a
novel
taking all the emotions that take place
in the novel
highlighting with different colors
cutting up the novel and taking all the
green and one ball and all the yellow
and another ball and all the red in
another ball
that when we encounter
a problem in the psyche we don't simply
encounter
one form of that problem we encounter a
cluster of experiences
that date back sometimes all the way
into our birth experience and sometimes
including former lives
but we when we melt this problem we melt
it in layers we first we melt the
outside layers the less problematic
until we eventually get to the very very
core what was the seed problem which may
date from this lifetime may date from
birth may date from a former lifetime
and we dissolve this cluster this coex
system
now my experience has been that the same
is true for the collective psyche
that the mind of the universe the mind
of our species
stores its history
in these massive thematic clusters
so all the trauma associated with war
all the trauma of drought and and
dying in the planes
all the trauma of male female violence
all these patterns of violence and and
pain and suffering
fear of death
that these don't exist as free-floating
private existences private memories
within the bardo of our individual souls
but this the collective psyche
aggregates its history into these
massive collective structures that i
call metacoat systems
so you have correct systems within the
personal psyche and metacog systems
within the collective psyche i think
when i was moved into the ocean of
suffering what was happening was
my system
was engaging
metacog systems within the collective
psyche and making some small
contribution to removing those clusters
from the collective psyche
you know not all of them certainly not
any of one all the way down this is a
work of generations
and all spiritual traditions
uh the saints and sages and the
contemplatives have the same experience
they all tap into
levels of suffering which are not
personal which go deeper and that's why
bodhichitta
manifesting the will to save all
sentient beings is the only appropriate
motivation for doing spiritual practice
because you quickly realize that this is
a game that's not a personal game it's
not a private game we're in this
together it's a it's a collective
evolutionary process
so for me that engages
media coax systems
what is
the species
aiming at as you understand it
oh i think we are we're
i don't know that we can really identify
aiming at
but we are constantly growing we are if
anything we are aiming at growing
uh because if we think that if we
identify what we're growing to what
we're really doing is only identifying
the next stage
of our evolutionary growing
but if we just look around
it's taken us 13.7 billion years to get
to here
and assuming we survive this crisis
we're going to be at it for millions and
millions of years more
so whatever this crisis is that humanity
is coming into and growing beyond to
grow beyond ego to grow beyond the
narrow confines of our
self-centered self-clinging
to go into a larger um
sense of our being and presence in the
universe and communion with the universe
this is just the next phase
and we will have more thresholds and
more challenges that will take us into
yet another phase so if i step back from
all of that and i say what is happening
here what is the project i think the
project is to grow and become more than
we were before
it's a process description it's not a
it's not a content description it's a
process description just to grow and
become more than we were to be more
capable
now i think another aspect of this just
on the short term
all the spiritual teachings teach us
that the essence of the individual is
the same as the essence of the totality
atman is brahman we are made of the
stuff of the divine if we speak of it in
divine languages or our buddha nature
our awakened nature is the same as the
buddha nature of all living things of
all things
so
um
when
one awakens to one's essential nature
your awakening to the
love and the compassion and the power
that created the universe that manifests
the universe
and that there are many stages to this
process but first there is the joy of
awakening to that
but then there is the process of
learning how to actualize that
so that
one's life becomes
a conscious manifestation of the power
of our essential nature manifesting in
the physical world and i don't i really
don't want to reduce this to such
simplistic philosophies like you become
like what you love and
and as you think is what becomes your
destiny but something basically that
recognizes
that
the experience what the experiences that
come at us in the outer world are in
some core way of reflection of what is
coming out of us at a deep cycle
spiritual level
and that once you understand that
there's this feedback process between
what we're putting out and what is
coming back to us and you take
responsibility for that process then you
begin to consciously manifest your
chosen destiny rather than inherit a
destiny which has been created by your
unconscious process
so that we are becoming at this stage i
think
conscious creators
of our own destiny we wake up
and we become
we're basically learning how to become
creators
because our nature
is the creative principle our nature is
the same as the nature which manifested
the entire physical universe
so what we're learning how to do is
first discover
and then actualize
and then
participate consciously
in creation
inside time and space
what we do with that where we take that
as a species
you know
let's imagine what we can do
a species operating out of that kind of
consciousness
yeah i'm getting the sense you know
coming back to the question i asked
earlier about like what is maybe
incomplete about
buddhism or other earlier teachings and
you know
there the sensibility that i at least
received was like
uh you know existence is a cycle of
birth and death that is
uh
in some ways sort of like hellish and
you should just escape and that's the
goal is to escape and get out and
from what i'm hearing from you it's
almost as if
both on individual and collective levels
the aim isn't to escape but to learn and
grow
and evolve and uh
have incomplete increased complexity and
and nuance and understanding of oneself
and the universe and really to to
manifest that um rather than just like
getting out or eradicating this or
something like that
yes i think so and in the end once we
make this transition we understand that
what we have escaped
is not time and space but we've escaped
a certain mental consciousness
associated
a constricted consciousness
that is associated with our living
inside time and space but when that
bubble pops
when we have truly escaped that small
world
we experience time and space completely
differently
we experience time and space
as the buddha world that's the buddha
nature
if you don't mind me asking what is your
everyday
consciousness like now after all of
these experiences and
uh explorations
yeah
well i wish i could tell you that i'm a
fully enlightened being and i just
cruise in the cosmic plains all the time
but that's not the case
integrating in my integrating these
experiences is a lifelong undertaking
in fact and the more i'm thinking about
it in the 20 years after i stopped this
work
um the more i appreciate
just how large the integration process
is even to the point that i really i
don't really think we know
how entering these deep
levels of reality is is influencing
us as human beings i i think we're just
scratching the surface
if we're working in therapeutic
work and if we're bringing out issues
from the personal unconscious
then we have a model
for how to integrate those experiences
if we go deeper and have spiritual
experiences of the intelligence that
runs through all of life we have
spiritual models for how we might
integrate those experiences
but when we go really really deep when
we go beyond space and time when we
enter
deep dissolve into the luminous body
of creation
how are those experiences being
integrated in us then in the end i don't
think you can integrate the infinite
into the finite
the only thing you can do is integrate
your finite existence
into infinity and that brings us back to
the nuts and bolts of spiritual practice
you must remove from your being
everything which keeps a smaller than
the reality that you are seeking to
enter into
and that's a that's a lifelong
undertaking
uh i used to think that maybe by the end
of my lifetime
maybe i would have succeeded
inaugurating all of these experiences
now i think that that's too optimistic i
think this work changed not only my
present
lifetime but it changed the trajectory
of my entire soul's evolution
i also want to say that i've kind of
come to the conclusion that
i pushed myself harder and farther on
this work than was really probably wise
for me
i think that it is possible
to go too deep
in one lifetime
and and it's not that the
the suffering is problematic it's not
that the pain that's inherent and
purifying it there's very very deep
levels it's problematic
it's the joy it's the ecstasy uh it's
being dissolved the ecstasy of being
dissolved into unspeakable
beauty and intelligence
which
can make your physical existence kind of
feel dried up like not worth living
and i think i have suffered from that
after stopping my work i've really had
to make
conscious choices and lifestyle choices
how to manage
the memories that now live within me
in a way that i don't think it's
necessarily
it's not something i don't recommend to
people it's a very demanding process
and i don't think i needed to do it this
way if i were starting it over again i
would be gentler i would have
gentler ambitions and a gentler take
more care of this precious body mind
what would that look like practically to
be gentler
i think it would mean uh fewer high dose
sessions it would mean if you're working
with psychedelics
uh it would mean integrating um working
with the substance like lsd which tends
to push the high cosmological ceiling
with substances like psilocybin or
ayahuasca which tend to be more body
grounded kind of staying closer to the
emotional textured body
of course it always means
integrating your
psychedelic work
with
daily spiritual practice
the more i've moved in this direction
the more i've come to understand that
the daily spiritual practice is
absolutely essential in order to handle
the enormous swings of energy and
insight that open to you in your
psychedelic work
but i would just be i would be gentler i
mean one of the reasons i pushed as hard
as i did
is because i had adopted what i learned
to be as a false model i had adopted a
vision that said the purpose of this
work was to reach a particular state
you know to reach the condition of
awakened state or to reach
to reach home to go home to reach heaven
to reach
to dissolve into the into the body of
god to dissolve into the metacosmic void
and what i found was that there are many
degrees of oneness and there are many
degrees even of the void
and no matter how deep i went i
discovered that there were dimensions
beyond even those dimensions and the key
came for me in the 50th session when i
was in the diamond luminosity i was as
deep in the diamond luminosity as i
would ever go
and right in the middle of that
existence
my field opened up and i saw a reality
far far into the distance that was
filled with the light that was even a
greater form of light than the diamond
luminosity and a beam of flight came and
hit me and absolutely shattered my mind
and that's when i realized it's an
infinite progression you never the idea
of getting to the end of it is just a
false idea it underestimates the breadth
of what we're dealing with
so once i i understood that it's not
about getting to a particular condition
or a particular state
that made me more patience or makes me
more patience with you open up
you bring as much of that reality into
your life as you can
and then you you crunch it you sit on it
you you integrate it into your daily
life and so i'd be
gentler and have more modest
expectations i'm more patient
with our human psycho spiritual
evolution than i was when i was a young
man
what would you recommend to someone
embarking on a similar journey if they
were inspired by your work
don't do it please
honestly i mean don't do it the way i
did it i'm not and you know i get lots
of letters from people who have said
i've never done psychedelics but i know
what you're speaking about i've been
doing a meditation for empty of years
and i've had these kinds of experiences
and so we know that psychedelics are not
unique to these experiences at all
but
my recommendation is to go slow always
work within a therapeutic modality
pay a lot of attention to your set and
setting not only on the day of your
sessions but when you do this work
everyone around you is impacted
your family members your friends i found
that my students were being drawn into
my psychedelic practice and that i wrote
the living classroom basically to
describe
quite to my surprise
how
what i had thought of as a purely
private spiritual practice was actually
registering and impacting the lives of
my students who are taking my courses in
this time
and that this is a natural
natural event that
consciousness is like water in the lake
you throw in a rock and the ripples
naturally spread out that this is true
spiritual practice as well
but it's just natural that people would
be touched by those experiences
so
i would be
gentler
again
i don't know why somebody would want to
go to the north pole
but it's not a recreational undertaking
it's a serious lifelong commitment and
i think it's much wiser simply to
explore closer to home
in ways that keeps the journey more
focused
on
the nuts and bolts of one's daily life
so i have more respect for using
psychedelics as therapy and as spiritual
awakening and it's a
relatively rare
individual who has the circumstances and
the constitution
to go
this as deep as i did into it and i
wanna there are dangers right if you
open up under less than ideal
circumstances if you open up in
circumstances in which you are mixing it
up with other people or at dance raves
you can open up prematurely you and you
can fail your you can have failure to
close you can hurt yourself
you can really hurt yourself in ways
that does long-term damage and may take
you years to recover
so i
i want to emphasize that this is not an
end run around traditional spirituality
it's not a and it's not an easy path
it's a tricky path
and it is a potentially dangerous path
and you have to be very cautious
when you are working with mind
amplifiers
i imagine the kind of person drawn to
doing the work that you did wouldn't
take your advice to not do it uh they
might take your advice to be gentler but
i imagine they'd be sort of bullish
about it and be like i'm gonna do it
anyway uh well you know one of the
things i hope is that
by seeing what i learned by seeing the
description of the universe that i was
able to bring back and share with other
people
i hope that that would answer or satisfy
a certain existential longing to know
these things so that they don't have to
go there
you know that they that they can be more
comfortable
living within
a
more
textured
or more inwardly closer to earth
textured form of spiritual practice that
they don't you don't you know when
people went to the moon
it satisfied so many of us
who have had that longing but who will
never make the trip
just to see their pictures and see what
it was like and i think that something
can be like that with spiritual practice
too
yeah that's a good metaphor for it i
think that certainly describes my own
experience reading your book and
uh
i'm grateful for sort of the oh i don't
remember what they call it but the
picture of the earth that they took from
the moon it's it's as if you took that
kind of a picture for us and
it's a really beautiful one
um earthrise i think maybe it's called
earthrise yeah
i'm curious what what do you make of
you know at this time there's sort of a
larger
uh
contemporary
renaissance you might say in
psychedelics what do you make of that
movement and what's happening there more
broadly
uh that's i think it's very exciting i
think it's about time i'm very glad that
we're going back in the direction of
integrating psychedelics into our
culture
right now the psychedelic renaissance is
focused on
therapeutic healing it's by
demonstrating the clinical effectiveness
of these amplifying substances
that we are opening the door to these
substances in our culture by
demonstrating that they help us deal
with post-traumatic stress depression or
alcohol addiction or death anxiety
by healing us of the wounds of life
we are demonstrating that these
substances have therapeutic value and
therapeutic efficacy and we're also
taking pictures of how the brains behave
on psychedelics and we're doing this
very carefully control studies
where we have control groups versus a
testing group and so on so forth this is
all really important i think it's it's a
very important stage but i do see it as
only a stage
what we're going to find is the same
thing we found in the early decades of
the psychedelic movement
that these this amplification of this
of the psyche which allows us to heal
the wounds of the personal psyche
that same amplification when continued
gets us gives us access to deeper and
deeper dimensions of consciousness now
there is a resistance to these deeper
dimensions right now because of our
metaphysical commitment to materialism
right our course you know
pre-quantum commitment is to believe
that
only things which are physical are real
and therefore when someone is having an
experience of something which goes
beyond physical reality
we call the substances that open up
these experiences hallucinogens because
the hallucination is something which is
not real all right it feels real but
it's not real
but i think what better understood these
substances are
mind amplifiers they are psychedelics
mind openers
and this once we
consolidate
and
provide sufficient evidence for the
healing potential of these substances we
will then begin to harness the deeper
manifesting potential of these
substances or their philosophical
potential
i think psychedelics represent an
enormous philosophical revolution
because they allow
those of us who are kind of have modest
capacities to have temporary access
to whose states of awareness and states
of reality that lie far beyond
space-time awareness
that has profound
uh metaphysical implications profound
philosophical implications we we can
have access
i mean a mystical experience does not a
mystic make and that's basically
paraphrasing houston smith and that's
true but a mystical experience does a
materialist unmake
and i think it can undo some of the
metaphysical constrictions of our era
and open us up to a deeper understanding
of what's actually taking place once you
dissolve into the intelligence of the
universe the intelligence of the mind of
the universe and into the compassionate
center of the mind of the universe it
radically transforms your understanding
of what life is about what we are doing
here what the process is
and that has
enormous ramifications and i think we
will be moving in that direction but
first we have to earn the right in a way
we have to earn that access through
demonstrating its clinical effect
efficacy
i am not a clinician i'm not a
psychologist i was not primarily
interested in
healing i was trained as a philosopher
of religion
and i simply could not wait
for us to get to this point in time if i
had waited for us to get to this point
in time i would have missed the
opportunity of a lifetime so
i did the work i did underground
undercover privately quietly i wish i
didn't have to i wish i could have done
it publicly i wish i could have been in
public discussion during all this time
but i did it
with the belief
as the early researchers did that there
will come a time
when we would reclaim these sacraments
and that we would begin to
systematically harness their deeper
potential and i think that's where we're
going
there is a movement among the
pharmaceutical industry that wants to
make money off these substances to try
to strip the magic out of the mushrooms
you know to basically extract
substances
which come from the psychedelic
substances but do not induce some of the
more exotic
or demanding states of consciousness
that
these substances do in their natural
state so that they can give us a pill
which you can take every day and then
they can sell us every day and because
psychedelics
you can't make money on psychedelics
because you don't use enough of them you
know you only use them intermittently
and the healing effect is so powerful
that you don't need to take them every
day right
the pharmaceutical industry wants to
make money off of them and i think
that's a danger and that's work we have
to really watch that i also think the
medicalization of psychedelics is also a
danger
it's understandable that it's important
for the scientists to maintain research
in these early years
but i think entering into these states
of consciousness is a human right
and i don't think it belongs
it doesn't belong under the governance
of
the medical community only
i think we're going to come into a point
where we recognize that there is a
broader community of specialists who are
skilled in navigating these landscapes
who are not necessarily mds and phds
you know in the
movement there's various organizations
that have formed to
be structured around
uh what you call sort of the therapeutic
use of psychedelics and i wonder
if in the future there might be
institutions structured around the more
philosophical or cosmological
explorations of the kind that you did
what you imagine those might look like
i think it's just a matter of time
i think there will be
in the near future
there will be clinics
institutional settings
hopefully
deep in nature
settings where people who want to
explore the deeper dimensions of their
consciousness can go and do so under
careful
uh supervision
they can do so safely there is backup
but they can do it in a
non-clinical or non-medical
set of expectations it's kind of like
the transition from taking birth out of
the hospitals into
uh turning it over to the midwives where
you have
medical care nearby if you need it but
birth is not a medical procedure birth
is an entirely natural procedure
likewise opening up into deep levels of
your own mind and the mind of the
universe is not a medical procedure even
if medical medicine can be very helpful
in the early stages
so i would anticipate that when there
will be organizations there will be
structures places
where you can go to work with sacred
medicines various psychedelics in a safe
and effective manner
which go beyond
therapeutic healing is i think it's just
a matter of time
what kind of affordances might those
structures need
that might be different from a more like
clinical or
medical treatment
therapeutic usage
well
first we should recognize that humanity
has already been doing this for
thousands of years
that there are in among the indigenous
people among the first nations peoples
among the in america
among the indigenous peoples in brazil
or in south america they've been working
ceremonially
with sacred substances for
hundreds thousands of years so we we
have a great deal of historical
precedent for how to do this how to open
up not only individuals but whole
communities into sacred space and bring
the entire community back and put them
through a series of exercises so that
they come back grounded really well
grounded into their physical lives
we're we're not reinventing the wheel
here we really have much to learn from
indigenous people and first nations
people on how to work with these
substances
now there are screening criteria you
you really want to screen people who are
going into these states there are some
people who really should not be entering
into these states either because of
physical health problems that they're
carrying
are psychological problems that they're
carrying it's just not a wise
procedure to adopt if you're carrying
certain tensions within your body and
mind so there there is a place for
screening but the cultures these
indigenous cultures they knew that they
screened it even though they didn't have
md's screening the process
so it's simply a matter of
building on what we're doing
incorporating the collected wisdom from
indigenous cultures
and
moving in to create our own unique forms
coming back to
the sort of vision for humanity at large
do you have any
advice for the coming generations
well the first thing i would say
is that i think we know enough about the
universe through reincarnation if you
really do your homework and you really
look at the data
if you look at the data from near-death
episode research if you look at the data
from out-of-body research we know enough
just enough to know
that we choose our incarnations
before we were born
we made an informed choice of the life
that we were being born into
so at a time when we knew more
than we remember now
we made the choice to live the life that
we're living now
not that we could see every detail but
we the fundamental core components we
could see before we were born and that
means
that whether or not we have conscious
recall of that choice
i think we have reasons to be confident
that we are
where we belong
as we enter this time in history that
all of us every one of us has
volunteered
to participate
in this very very challenging time so
that's the first level is to be kind of
centered in your core
and knowing that you don't have to run
around and you don't have to go
someplace else or do something else
that you were already planting yourself
on a trajectory that allows you to
participate
in this process
and this process is the process of the
transformation of an entire culture it's
going there is not one
person or one type of person or
a healer or therapist or
artist that's going to make this
transition work it's going to take all
of us it's going to take all the skills
that humanity has to make this work
the real question is
i think
not
how do we
how do we do how do we engage this
process meaningfully so we can help us
transform
the real question is
do we have the courage to do which we
know we can do what is at hand do we
have the courage to really enter into
this process consciously
and that means we basically have to have
the courage to become
the future human
that we know the world needs we need to
become the human
that the world needs in order to survive
this crisis we need to become more
compassionate we need to work to create
a culture
which is more egalitarian more fair more
just
we need to show greater respect to the
earth and to our the animal cousins who
live on this earth with us
we need to basically become
in our own personal lives
what humanity is trying to forge
in our collective life
more where and that means doing inward
practice it also means doing outward
practice of social transformation
clearing out our own hearts of anything
which keeps us small and helping clean
out those things in our culture which
keeps our culture small and focused on
values which are destroying the earth
thank you for sharing that and uh also
for answering all my questions and
speaking on so many topics i i wonder if
there's anything else that you'd like to
say or or talk about
we are coming into a hard time in
history we're coming into a time when
decade by decade things are going to be
getting worse and worse there will be
tremendous social anxiety and personal
anxiety
as we basically inherit the consequences
of our abuse of the earth for all the
hundreds of years that we've been
creating this extractive
economy
but
i hope
in everybody's own individual spiritual
practices one encounters enough of the
universe to experience the profound
wisdom
the great intelligence that's behind
this moment of transformation
and the great compassion and love that's
behind
this time in our history
that this is not we are not victims this
is not an accident
it is a time that calls for us to become
the heroes that we have the possibility
of being that we really nothing less
than deep deep heroic
sacrifice and actualization is called
for
but
the universe will support us every time
we make a change to live to the larger
good
the universe will support us it will
it will help us
overcome our shortcomings
this is
you know this is the game of life this
is the great time of our life
in the end
we don't want to live a comfortable life
so much as we want to live a life that's
meaningful
and this is going to give us all an
opportunity to live very meaningful
lives
i appreciate you putting that in
perspective and uh speaking so clearly
about it thank you for that and
thank you as well for your time today
it's been a real pleasure to speak with
you
tazim thank you for this conversation
thank you for the conversations you've
been having with many people uh all
focused on helping us know
more and become
more
that we have the possibility of becoming
thank you
you're so welcome it's a it's an honor
and a privilege so
thank you